I don't think negotiations are about
trust. That word is thrown around a lot.
I don't trust Iran, but I do think you
have to have some respect that your
[music] adversary has interests. At the
end of the day, it's a negotiation, so
they have to get something out of it.
>> Wendy Sherman, diplomat and negotiator,
[music] on how to unlock a deal with
Iran. How do you think this is going to
end?
>> What will happen to that stockpile of
highly enriched uranium? It's not like
you can resolve that in a day. It is a
complex, tedious operation under very
difficult security arrangements.
>> From Bloomberg Weekend, this is the
Michelle Hussein show.
How should we make sense of another
dramatic week in the situation between
the US and Iran?
Blockade, ships being fired on,
essentially the use of force alongside a
diplomatic track, or at least an
attempted one. That's the backdrop to
this episode as we continue to look at
the Iran war from different angles. And
this time, it's with someone who knows
what it's like to negotiate for the
United States with Iran, because she did
it. She's been in those rooms. It was
for a different American president, but
elements of the Iranian lineup she knew
are still there.
She's Ambassador Wendy Sherman,
long-time US diplomat, former Deputy
Secretary of State, who worked on the
Iran nuclear deal of 2015.
That's the one abandoned by Donald Trump
in his first term.
And by the time she left the State
Department in 2023, she'd been President
Biden's key person on China.
So, this conversation goes beyond the
Middle East, to China, to Russia, and to
Europe. But, for obvious reasons, Iran
is where we began.
I think that it's quite critical for
people to understand Iran's culture, its
history, its people, its government, its
theology. It's very different than
American or Western sensitivities. It is
a culture of resistance. When the 1979
Iranian Revolution happened, it was
really a reaction to what we and the
British had done in 1953 when we knocked
off a prime minister because we were
afraid that Iran was going to
nationalize the oil industry and we
thought that would hurt us, oil being
the constant here.
And so we put in the Shah of Iran who
was probably good for us Westerners, but
terrible for Iran. He was quite
oppressive, quite a dictator, and it led
to the 1979 Islamic Revolution.
And it is remaining a culture of
resistance. So every time President
Trump tries to bully Iran, Iran has
immense pride and dignity. It's not
something we all understand because
they're a terrible regime that
slaughtered protesters in the street,
but it is who they are.
>> I imagine that this kind of sweep of
history which you're describing right
now, this must have been what it was
like when you sat in those rooms with
the Iranian negotiators. Did they
lecture you along these kinds of themes?
>> Oh, we certainly at the beginning of the
negotiations had lots of lectures and
lots of lectures from those who were in
Tehran. Over time, however, we just got
down to the brutal details of this
negotiation. When you're negotiating
around nuclear issues or military issues
or proxies, the devil is definitely in
the details.
>> Yeah, but the fact that you're
mentioning the historical context now,
does that mean that you are saying that
the Trump administration needs to
understand this and doesn't and they
will only get so far if they don't?
>> Without a doubt, the regime now
is more hardline than even the previous
supreme leader who was pretty hardline
and I think there's a great deal even
more control by the Islamic
Revolutionary Guard Corps than there was
before.
And that means that
the concessions the president thinks
will come easily will not come easily.
They will resist. They will never, I
believe, give up what they believe is
their right to enrich. They may
voluntarily suspend it, but they won't
give up the right. I don't think they'll
give up their relationship to their
proxies. They may reduce the level of
their support. I don't think they'll
give up their missile program, though
they may be willing to constrain it in
some ways. So, I don't think that
when President Trump wants them to
really just capitulate,
that's never going to happen.
>> But precisely because it is such a
hardline regime,
harder line you're saying than the one
you dealt with, isn't there therefore a
role for this kind of maximum pressure
strategy? The keeping Iran on its toes,
the constant changing of position, the
overwhelming use of military force, for
example, the navy has been destroyed.
Does that give the United States a point
of leverage?
>> I think that there always in these kind
of negotiations needs to be a credible
threat of force.
And in this case, perhaps even the use
of some of the mechanisms the president
has used.
But I think he believes not only in a
madman theory, which is act crazy and
people will not know what you're going
to do,
but I think he doesn't have a strategy.
I think he's very tactical, very
transactional as he was as a builder, as
a developer.
And in this case, I don't think that
transactional approach will actually
work in the end. It may get him some
leverage, but I don't see an overall
strategy and I don't think it's been
clear what he really will consider
success.
Sarah Longwell, who's the publisher of
The Bulwark, certainly not a progressive
magazine, she's a neo-conservative,
has said that the president is
committing superpower suicide. And I
think that's a good description because
what he has done has cost our alliances,
has cost our American taxpayers, and of
course 13 American lives, and an
enormous cost to our military, to our
inventory of weapons, to our ability to
project our power abroad.
>> And I imagine you would never have had a
positive view of Donald Trump and his
foreign policy, right? You worked in the
Biden administration, you worked for the
Obama administration before that. So,
his world view would never have been
yours.
>> I'm not sure what his world view is. My
greatest concern, Michelle, is not
any specific thing he does.
It's does he have a plan? Does he have a
strategy? Or does he just go by impulse
every day about what he thinks he needs
to do next?
And sometimes that's useful to trust
your gut and your instincts,
but not every day in every way. So, no,
I'm not a supporter of the president's,
but I am a supporter of the United
States of America, and I am a supporter
of American foreign policy and American
power.
But I think our projection of power
should be to get to a good result
and you need strategy before you take
action.
>> I want to use your expertise to dig into
some of the latest news lines at the
point that we're speaking. What is most
worrying to you and it's hard to know
where to start in terms of the dramatic
instances of the last few days. For
example, the US firing on an Iranian
ship, Iran also reportedly firing on
Indian ships, blockade by the United
States and also the closure of the
Strait of Hormuz by Iran. What stands
out to you?
>> I think the last point really stands out
to me and is another downside of what's
occurred.
Before this war
the Strait of Hormuz was open.
There was freedom of navigation. It was
important to the world's economy. Now, I
think Iran will always believe that they
have control over the Strait of Hormuz.
Even if they open it up again, which I
certainly hope happens,
we all know they can close it again.
They may exert other kinds of control,
tolls, approval by the IRGC. I have no
idea where this will all end, but that
is of great concern because freedom of
navigation is critical to the world
economy.
>> Are you saying that they will always be
able to close it again even if the US
continues a blockade, even if the US
sends more military assets to the area,
even if the US wipes out even more
Iranian military assets?
>> Well, certainly we can do that, but it
would come at enormous cost to us and
the strait, as I think everybody has now
seen on a map, is a very narrow channel.
And along the coastline
are Iranian military assets. And we have
all seen both in the war in Ukraine and
now in the Middle East, drone technology
has changed how wars are waged. And so
Iran will always have capability and
yes, there is no question
that President Trump
has diminished Iran's capability, has
destroyed their navy but not their fast
boats, not their drone technology. They
haven't bombed away their nuclear
knowledge. Yes, they have pushed the
highly enriched uranium underground.
But they have not bombed away all of
Iran's knowledge and it may take them
time to reconstitute their missiles,
their navy, their nuclear program. All
of that may be true,
but I think they will try to do so.
>> Do you think that actually the Strait of
Hormuz could be controlled and kept
closed even with a few men with small
arms on speedboats?
>> It certainly will make it concerning for
shippers.
Shipping is about insurance and whether
insurers feel there's adequate security
to let those ships go through.
And so at the end of the day, that's a
decision the ships will have to make and
even in the brief time when it was
open again,
the insurers didn't feel it was safe
enough to send the ships through.
And that's really the bottom line here.
>> Before we talk about the Iranian
officials you know, some of whom are in
even more prominent positions than they
were when you were negotiating.
What are you hearing about the president
himself?
Do you think he is well?
There's been increasing talk in the last
week or so about the extent to which he
is posting through the night, about the
nature of his decisions. Some people
feel that we are moving into a different
era in terms of his decision-making.
>> I can't begin to know what is in
President Trump's head.
I'm not sure he knows from moment to
moment. He's always tweeted at night. He
is a night owl. He starts his day late.
I don't think that's new, but I do think
his impulse behavior
has increased.
And that is of great concern to me.
I'm not sure he understands the stakes
here.
It's not about just winning
this war.
It's about what it means for America
going forward. He's due to go to China
in May
to meet with President Xi.
I think he's going to go in a weakened
position.
No matter how things turn out because
even if an agreement is reached, it will
be principles, it will be broad
outlines, and then people will have to
do all of the details, which will take
weeks if not months, if not over a year
to resolve. And so there will be this
disequilibrium for a very time in the
Middle East. We have allies in the
Middle East who are now saying,
"Send us your dollars or we're going to
have to use Chinese yuan to be able to
go through the Strait of Hormuz." People
have turned to China to build a trade
relationship because they don't feel
they can rely on the United States
anymore. Some of our best allies,
Canada,
the UK, have said they can't rely on us
and have
beaten a path to China.
This would be of great concern to all of
us.
>> But can I take you back in time because
one of the things I noticed in your book
which I found really striking in the
present context is the keeping allies
out at key moments. I see what you're
saying about this is a whole different
degree, but elements of this have
happened before, haven't they? In your
book you described the secret back
channel that you were part of with Iran
and the moment that you had to go to
Brussels and tell the Europeans that
there was a complete draft agreement
between the US and Iran in place, of
which they knew nothing.
>> Indeed. I think everyone understands,
and certainly understood then,
that if we could not get an agreement,
it would be the American military
that would have to intervene
and try to change the calculus of Iran.
And everyone understood
that no deal would be made unless it was
a deal the United States could agree to.
No one likes that we have unequal power.
I understand that,
but everybody understands it. So, my
European allies, Cathy Ashton was the
high representative at the time, she was
not shocked. She was not surprised. My
European allies
were not happy, but they were not
shocked. And Russia and China, who were
part of this negotiation,
also were not shocked. And actually,
they were sort of happy that things were
moving along, that President Obama had
made a very courageous decision in
opening up this channel. So, yes, the US
has unequal power. It is
un-
doubting, undoubtable among the world.
But we have to be humble about it. We
have to have humility.
>> But do you accept that that this is a
version of what has happened before,
rather than an entirely new development?
I mean, do you
actually to keep a secret like that from
people who are on the same side as the
United States as far as Iran's
concerned?
>> So, no, I don't think it's the same,
because I think this is of such a
magnitude.
And it's not just about Iran. We brought
all of our European allies in. We
brought Russia and China in. We went to
the United Nations. I spent an enormous
amount of time talking to the Gulf Arab
states, an enormous amount of time
talking to Israel, to Australia, to
anybody else who wanted to talk about
what we were doing. So, we were as
transparent as we possibly could be in a
timely fashion. And that deal that came
in through the secret channel had
brackets in it. There was still some
things to be negotiated. And the
ministers came together and in fact
didn't agree initially to what we had
put on the table. We're quite unhappy
about it actually. So, some changes were
made. So, people had input. America
acted with its power, but we did not act
alone.
>> And a key point person on the other side
at that time was Abbas Araqchi, who is
now Iran's foreign minister, who was
there at those Islamabad talks.
What should we know about him? What was
your experience of him?
>> He is very smart. He is very tough.
His English is quite good. All the
negotiations were in English.
Before we had the negotiation led by
Foreign Minister Javad Zarif, and
Araqchi was one of his deputies,
we had a negotiation with Saeed Jalili.
And Araqchi was on his team, but we
never knew he spoke English because
everything was done in Farsi. So,
Araqchi's very tough. He can get angry.
He is part of the revolution. He was
part of it then. He has bone of fides.
He had a strong relationship with the
Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps, even
though he's getting some criticism now,
I think some of that is drama.
>> So, you'd seen him around these rooms,
but you didn't realize that he spoke
such good English until suddenly you
were negotiating with him.
>> Yes. It was quite astonishing. I don't
even think we all recognized he was part
of the delegation when Jalili led it,
but then things changed dramatically.
>> Am I right in thinking that you
did develop something of a bond with
him? That these were difficult talks,
but there was something of a
relationship that formed.
>> Yes.
Now, I want to be clear. I don't think
negotiations are about trust. That word
is thrown around a lot.
I don't trust Arachi.
I don't trust Iran.
He doesn't trust me. They don't trust
me. In fact, at one point, there was
death to Wendy Sherman on the streets of
Tehran.
>> That was because of something you had
said about Iran which became essentially
a news a news point there.
>> Exactly. We got past that. But, I do
think you have to have some respect that
your adversary has interests.
You may not agree with their interests.
You may think they're horrible.
And I think the regime is awful.
But, they do have interests. And so, you
have to understand that. And even though
it was an unequal negotiation, we were
the demander.
They were the adversary. At the end of
the day, it's a negotiation. So, they
have to get something out of it.
>> I'm going to quote a part of your book
where you describe this experience. Amid
the host of topics, nuclear and
non-nuclear, cultural and political that
we could not talk about, Arachi and I
made a permanent human connection. Years
after the end of the negotiations,
Arachi still sends me a greeting at
Christmas time, and I send him greetings
at Nowruz, the Iranian New Year.
Although I don't as a Jew celebrate
Christmas, I do appreciate the holiday
sentiment. We don't know how our human
connections may yet serve the world. Did
you this year on the Iranian New Year
send him a greeting?
>> No, and we haven't been in touch in
years now.
Since um the first Trump administration.
No. All of the ties were broken. So, no,
I haven't been in touch at all. And you
know, as I wrote in the book, he and I
became grandparents at the same time.
So, we showed each other pictures of our
infants.
I had a discussion with he and Takht
Ravanchi
about being Jewish. They knew I was
Jewish.
That was sort of strange. I couldn't
shake their hand because I was a woman.
And I had a conversation with the two of
them on the margins once saying,
"You know,
we really have something in common. I
grew up in a Jewish community where were
Orthodox Jews and then men could not
shake my hand." And at first they were
sort of stunned that I was having this
conversation, but then we talked about
it. And some of it was real and some of
it wasn't. We all knew each other well
enough to know some of it was trying to
reach across to understand each other.
But,
it just makes
creates a human bond.
Again, it doesn't change that they have
interests and they're going to go
negotiate as tough as they can. It
didn't change what the president, what
the secretary of state had task me to
do.
But, we could sort of take down the veil
a little bit to be able to deal with
each other. Because, for 28 days at the
end of this negotiation, we were all in
a hotel together. I ate one meal outside
that hotel.
And you can't spend that much time, same
with my European and Russian and Chinese
colleagues, without getting to know each
other.
>> Did you hesitate about telling them you
were Jewish?
>> No.
Uh because I knew they knew.
Likewise, it was a very strange
circumstance.
The negotiation was coordinated by the
high representative of the European
Union, first Cathy Ashton and Federica
Mogherini, two women. Their deputy was
Helga Schmid, a wonderful German
diplomat who was seconded to the
European Union, a woman. And then me,
head of the US delegation. And uh I had
women in my delegation, but the other
delegations at the start did not have
women. But over time, everybody found a
woman to bring cuz I think they thought
they could deal with the high
representative, with Helga, and with me
better if they had a woman on their
delegation. And I'm glad for that if I
helped other women rise up a little bit.
Of course, that is completely absent
now.
>> And any women in the room? Only American
side or the Iranian side?
>> Indeed. Indeed. Well, they were never on
the Iranian side. But it's interesting,
so many of the reporters and press
people from Iran are women.
>> So, what about the absence of women on
the American side? Does that jump out to
you as you look at like the pictures of
the talks in Islamabad? And presumably
it'll be the same kind of scene if it
happens again.
>> Well, it certainly jumps out at me, but
doesn't surprise me. But what I care
about here
is that we get to a good end. And if the
president of the United States and his
team, which I think is not really
well-seasoned to do this negotiation,
if they come to an agreement that is
good for our country and for the world,
I'll be for it.
>> So, let's talk then about what a deal
could look like to resolve this because
you've got the American demands on one
side, an end to enrichment, an end to
the ballistic missile program. On the
Iranian side, they'd like an end to
sanctions. I'm simplifying. What do you
think the landing zone could be for a
deal?
>> Well, what we've heard, what's been
reported,
is perhaps a suspension of their
enrichment program for
X number of years.
Whether that's
10 or 15 or 20, I don't know. And it
would have to be monitored and verified
by the International Atomic Energy
Agency.
And it would have to be quite an
intrusive kind of monitoring and
verification.
It would mean some controls on their
missile program so they can't get a
long-range ballistic missile that could
reach the United States. And certainly
Europeans would be very concerned about
their ability to reach Europe, which
would be sooner than being able to reach
the United States.
It might be some controls on their
proxies. Hamas, Hezbollah, other
militias, the Houthis.
It would certainly be opening of the
Strait of Hormuz, which is I said before
was always open until this war.
The United States, I think Iran will
want us out of the Middle East.
And that is a problem. Our second
largest naval base is in Bahrain.
Uh and we have other assets throughout
the Middle East. And of course Israel is
an ally and we try to protect their
security. They will want us not to
threaten them anymore and they would
want guarantees and insurances they
won't be attacked again.
There's lots of pieces of this puzzle on
the table.
And it's a very, very complex and very
detailed negotiation.
>> Even more than what you did more than 10
years ago.
>> Much, much, much more.
>> I mean the the more we talk about it,
the more elusive it feels.
At the same time, I think that there are
moments of opportunity that come out of
the out of the darkest times. So,
how do you think this is going to end?
Because one way or another, surely it
has to. Apart from anything else, the
global economy is going to steadily be
eroded in the coming months if it isn't.
>> I quite agree with you.
Right now, all I see is
a disequilibrium.
What I mean by that is
some broad outline
where folks are going to have to spend
quite a long time making sure the
details
undergird that broad outline.
And while all of that happens,
my guess is
that Iran will still have some
measure of control over the Strait.
What will happen to that stockpile of
highly enriched uranium?
It's not like you can resolve that in a
day. It is a complex,
tedious operation under very
difficult security arrangements.
>> Buried underground?
>> Buried underground, deep underground.
We've done things like this before
in Kazakhstan, but we did it with
Kazakhstan's
working with us.
And I don't know how anyone will feel
secure doing this with Iran.
So, there's so much to work out here,
Michel.
I worry
about the administration's ability to do
it,
since I don't think they've brought the
technical expertise to the table.
In the last round in Islamabad, I was
glad to see that Vice President Vance
brought some experts with him.
But I'm not sure any of them were any in
any of the rooms.
I'm not sure they were really working on
everything that was needed to be done.
And none of this is achieved by one
person or even three negotiators, Vice
President Witkoff and Kushner.
I had a core team of 15.
I had the President of the United
States, the Secretary of State,
Secretary of Energy, who was a nuclear
physicist, who was brilliant. I had
nuclear physicists and sanctions experts
and lawyers and Treasury folks on my
team.
I had people who spoke fluent Persian on
my team, Farsi as some people call it.
I had literally hundreds in the US
government who were engaged in this. All
of our national labs, all of our nuclear
labs, who could do the exquisite
calculations that are necessary to know
whether you've got what you think you've
got.
I don't see any of that infrastructure
here
to be able to get this job done.
>> What are the implications for the rest
of the world? I'm I'm going to pick out
two countries in particular, China and
Russia, because we in the last few weeks
on this show have explored this
situation, the war in Iran, from
different angles.
You mentioned China already. In what
ways is it benefiting? What concrete
ways?
>> Well, concretely, we've already seen
several
leaders of countries make their way to
China because they want to strike trade
deals with China. They don't feel like
they can just rely on the United States.
And that makes China stronger.
>> That was happening before this war.
>> But it's happening at an accelerated
pace, I believe.
We saw the Iranians say, "You can come
through the Strait of Hormuz if you pay
us in Chinese yuan."
Uh in renminbi. So, not US dollars. Oil
has always been traded in US dollars.
That may change, and the US dollar has
always been the world's reserve
currency, and I think we will see a
greater move to trying to at least get a
basket of currencies. All of this
diminishes US power. Yes, there has been
some hits against China. It's been
harder for them to get their oil. We've
been concerned about what they're
sharing with Iran, but I think she who
has tremendous control over his country,
the kind of control I think President
Trump would love to have, will be in a
very strong position. He also
will be able to say, "You took military
action against a country for which there
was no imminent threat.
If we try to take further control of
Taiwan,
how can you criticize us?
And that is very powerfully concerning.
>> And you led on China for the State
Department as your as your last job in
the Biden administration. Of course,
China's also got to
witness the US at war
and seen munitions being destroyed and
depleted and had a real sense of of how
the US operates in real in a real-life
military operation.
>> Yes, on one hand, they've seen that our
military is staggeringly capable,
exquisitely capable, really quite
stunning.
But they've also seen, as you noted, a
depletion
of our inventory.
And we are trying, and the president is
focused on trying to accelerate our
production of that. But they have also
seen
that asymmetric warfare
works as well.
That the Iranians have used drones,
the Strait of Hormuz,
their missiles to be very targeted in
what they do,
and as a result have been able to keep
our exquisite military off kilter.
>> But how would they use that information?
What could they do that's similar to
what Iran has done?
>> Well, they know their own asymmetric
capabilities,
trying to in the South China Sea take
islands and create military bases out of
rocks is
innovative and trying to keep us and
other countries at bay.
They will probably imagine will Taiwan
try to use drone technology? Will they
try to use asymmetric warfare? And
indeed, I think they know that the US
has probably been talking to Taiwan
about making sure they understand
asymmetric warfare. We are in a whole
different world of warfare. And I
haven't even begun to talk about what
artificial intelligence is doing to
warfare. It's all going to change and is
changing dramatically.
>> expect the Trump-Xi summit to go ahead
next month? And
what do you think the atmosphere will be
like?
>> Right now I do expect it to go forward.
However,
if everything falls apart and the United
States
escalates militarily in Iran,
if President Trump, who I do believe is
concerned about casualties,
our casualties.
I don't know how worried he is about
Iranian civilian casualties because
there have been many, but I think that
if the president feels he has to
escalate militarily,
then it will be a problem for the
summit to go forward.
>> Because he just wouldn't have the
capacity or just wouldn't be the climate
or because the Chinese actually might
not want to meet him?
>> All of the above.
All of the above.
I think right now
the president will want to go
and show that he is not afraid, that he
has power, that he has control, that
you know, he really is a president who
many ways admires President McKinley out
of American history, who believed in
spheres of influence, who believed in
the use of tariffs,
who believed in the use of the bully
pulpit. The president likes all of those
things. And so I think he would still
want to go. And I think the reason they
made it May, not April, is because they
didn't know how long it would take to
try to get this resolved, or at least
get it to a place where there was this
disequilibrium, but some stasis.
So,
I think the president will still try to
go, yes.
>> And Russia, has Russia benefited from
this war?
>> Absolutely.
>> In what way?
>> Well, first of all, the United States
has
month by month taken off the sanctions
on Russia. The president has done that
because he wants to try to keep enough
oil in the oil markets to lower the
price.
American taxpayers don't all understand
that the price of oil is decided
globally in the global markets. The
president keeps saying, "We have lots of
oil in the United States. This doesn't
bother us." We do have lots of oil, but
that's not how the price gets decided.
And so, when Americans drive and they
look at any gas station, they see the
price has gone up from what it was. And
every time something bad happens in the
Middle East, it goes up again. So, I
think the president's got only so much
time to resolve this. People have talked
about there are three things on the
president's mind.
Markets. We've seen how he uses Friday
to say optimistic things so the markets
close well on Friday, oil stays stable.
Munitions. Making sure we have enough.
And our midterms. Which are coming up.
And most Americans make up their minds
by this summer.
>> But that's what's so strange about all
of this. I was here in Washington a few
months ago talking to Peter Navarro and
all the talk was this was going to be
the year where the focus was on
affordability, very conscious of the
midterms were coming up. And then
look at what happened.
So, is the calculation that there's
still enough time to
put the focus somewhere else in the next
few months?
>> Well, what I see from the outside, and
of course, I'm not inside the White
House,
is the White House keeps trying to plan
to deliver an affordability message
and the president steps on his own lines
and ends up talking about
our power
waging the war
that we are winning
that it's almost over.
Every day it's almost over.
And that's been going on for some time.
>> I do want to take you back to your time
in the Biden administration to un-ask
whether some of the seeds for what is
happening now in the Middle East were
laid in that time. You left government
in the summer of 2023. That was before
October the 7th. But as you watched
Secretary Blinken and President Biden
deal with Israel through the Gaza war
did they fail to restrain Israel in a
way that has contributed to what we're
seeing now?
>> I think America
Democrats and Republicans
have not dealt with the Middle East in a
way that's helped really create
stability and peace.
And I put that on both parties including
Democrats.
Obviously the Iraq war was a disaster.
And that laid the seeds for
all kinds of things that we had to deal
with.
Then of course President Obama tried to
deal with Iran through the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action, the Iran
nuclear deal.
That was undone by Trump.
Biden tried
but
Iran and the world
thought well
Trump
cut it to pieces.
And so there was no belief that anything
was sustainable.
Could the Biden administration have done
more? I'm sure we could have. Every
administration in hindsight could have
done more, could have done differently,
could have pressed hard.
Uh the politics in our country have been
very tied up
with our relationship with Israel in
many ways. So, it's it's a tough call.
And it's something I think we all have
to unpack and look back on.
>> Too tied up with Israel. I wonder what
you
think of that given that it seems to be
an increasing political issue now for
Democrats and for Republicans.
>> I think that it is critical
that Israel remain an ally of the United
States
and that we protect the right of a
Jewish state.
But I also believe that the prime
minister has led us down a road
and we have been part of it
that has in essence created a genocide
in Gaza.
That has
destabilized the Middle East.
I think what President Trump did around
the Abraham Accords was a good
initiative.
But he didn't follow through.
He didn't really work what was necessary
to get there.
And he shouldn't have torn up the Iran
nuclear deal.
Any more than President Trump
should not have ended our strong support
for Ukraine
in its fight against Russia
or
have figured out a way besides the
enormous cost to our country and to the
world in what he has done
in Iran.
>> I mean, you're voicing a very
controversial view in calling Gaza a
genocide. I wonder in your community of
Jewish Americans, what what is your
reading? Is this gaining currency? It's
certainly seen more, isn't it, amongst
younger Jewish Americans?
>> It's certainly seen among younger, but I
think it is a grown view. And you know,
genocide is in many ways a legal term.
So, I can't make the legal analysis
about whether it is literally a
genocide.
But there is no doubt
that Gaza
was demolished.
Palestinians
deserve
a home
and dignity and peace.
And Israel absolutely deserves security
and peace.
And I am a strong supporter of Israel
and the right of a Jewish state.
But I am not
a supporter of destroying any
civilization or any people.
That goes for the Palestinians.
And I'm not for destroying the Iranian
civilization either, or the Iranian
people, as much as I might find the
regime odious.
>> So, finally, Ambassador Sherman, how
how are you handling this period
yourself? I mean, are you finding it
personally difficult? How
um how do you cope when you see what's
happening in the news, like knowing
policy as you do and seeing mistakes
as you see it?
What's the impact on you?
You served the United States all your
professional life.
>> Right.
I actually have found myself angrier
and angrier because the cost
is so great.
The cost to American families is
profound.
The cost to
the world is profound.
The cost to our alliances, our
partnerships, our future, young people
from all around the world.
They all know that their world is going
to be controlled by artificial
intelligence and quantum.
And these are enormous challenges and
China's a main competitor in that
world.
And our ability to focus on that
challenge
is being diminished. And so, yes,
every day I am
more worried for
my child, for my grandsons,
about the world they're going to grow up
in, and whether the America I love and
believe in,
whose 250th anniversary is coming up,
will still be the America that I
treasure.
Ambassador Wendy Sherman,
>> [music]
>> thank you.
>> Thank you.
>> [music]